---
layout: post
title: "Notes From a Highly Intelligent Idiot"
---

# Notes From a Highly Intelligent Idiot

I say "highly" with some irony. Those of us who prize intelligence,
when confronted with a problem, would instinctively apply intelligence
as the universal hammer. And what if the problem doesn't go away? More
intelligence. I need to become smarter. I need to read more
books.

Wield the hammer with more force.

But more often than not, the problem is not resolved. While I bury my
face in my books, the problem would go away, and life passes me by. I
learned the mating behaviour of prairie vole and oxytocin, and the
girl lost interest.

Intelligence is wonderful, of course. I've had no greater pleasure
than seeing an elegant proof of completeness and consistency in an
alternative formulation of prepositional logic. It was a religious
experience, a breaking of revelatory light, an orgiastic, intense
stimulation of the intellect.

Or when I am profoundly moved by what Nietzsche written, I would not
think for a moment of giving up intelligence for anything in the world
(although in idle chatterings with friends, I often say that I would
trade IQ points for correspoding happiness, even for a stupid
contentedness).

Beyond a point, intellect becomes a liability. Knowledge is growing
exponentially, literally inexhuastible. It seduces. For those of us
naturally inclined to knowledge, it sucks away time and energy from
our limited life. Daniel Dennet has a wonderful quip, "a scholar is
just a library's way to make another library."

I don't want to be a scholar. I am young enough, idealistic enough,
naive enough, that I still want to make a difference in the _Real
World_. I dread to think that one day when I am long past 80, riped
for death, my hearing gone, shitting in my diaper, and squinting to
read, I would finally come to realize that all my life I had only
read, and nothing else.

(Did I mention that I love to read?)

So, I have this impressive, *colossal* intellect, what's the problem?
Nothing comes for free. Focused on learning, I had allowed myself to
become socially stunted. It was not just a passive indifference
either, it was an active contempt of the world, a world so petty, so
ugly, so lacking in purity, elegance, beauty, and goodness.

But I no longer feel that way. The world is as it is, a riotous
scramble of good and bad, beauty and mindless kitsch, daily pettiness
and incredible display of kindness. The world has no need to fit
anyone's sense of aesthetic, for it is bursting with life.

What I lack is a sense of reality. I am learning to be practical. To
that end, I am frequently surprised by how clueless I am. I am
learning. It is painful and scary. I had to give up many aspects of my
identity, and familar models and pet theories of the world and
people. My sense of reality and my sense of self are in a constant
schizophrenic flux.

Which is good. I have changed a lot over the last two years. But then,
weirdly, I also feel that nothing really changed. I am fundamentally
the same. Perhaps a good measure of maturity, then, when it comes, is
to find out what should, and could, change, and to be able to come to
terms with what cannot.
