---
layout: post
title: I Give Up
---

# I Give Up

When I am really upset, my left hand hurts like hell. It's hurting
like hell now. There is something I do all the time: I'd go to hang
out with people, and all night not saying a single word. The larger
the group the worse the problem. Even if I know everyone. I don't say
a word. I refuse to speak.

My silence bothers me. It's not only not saying anything, my mind also
freezes. I don't think anything. Ironically, people would ask me what
I am thinking. There's something with being in a group that paralyzes
me. I am utterly unable to divine a group identity, and adapting my
own to fit in it.

I always feel detached. I don't feel excluded, but I don't feel I
belong. I have trouble following the conversation, which is really a
collective stream of consciousness.

I don't have the group instinct. 

Since I've always been individualistic, maybe I shouldn't keep my hope
up that one day I'd suddenly "get it". I'd probably never be able to
participate in a group. I'd never be able to merge my identity with a
group.

That be as it may, there are things I can do well. Maybe the only
thing that's wrong with me is that I am easily bored out of my
mind. Maybe it's not my problem that I feel disconnected. Is it really
my problem that I don't give a shit about astrology?

Man, I wish I can talk about linguistics.

I wish I can talk about the impact Nietzsche has on my life. I wish I
can talk about how much I love Beethoven without having to worry about
how smug I'd sound. I wish we can talk about the beautiful things that
moved us deeply. I wish I don't have to feel like I don't know
anything because I don't follow celebrity news. I wish I don't have to
feel like I don't know how to have fun, just because I read, like,
books!

Somehow I am the weird one.

_Fuck it_.
