---
layout: post
title: I Can't Write
---

# I Can't Write

One advice to not being able to write is to write something
anyway. And that something, the advice goes, might as well be about
not being able to write. So here I am, writing about not being able to
write.

The problem may be this: I wish you to read this. But then, I can't
find anything that interests me enough that I think it might interest
you. So I stall at nothing.

It is hard pull things out of a vacuum. Even novelists don't create. A
novelist has to feed on life. The first novel, for the writer's lack
of exposure to the diversity of life, are often autobiographical, the
result of self-cannibalism. One's own life is the only thing to feed
on.

Or I could react. It's hard to think of worthy things to say. But we
don't only read things that are worthy to be read. We love gossip, and
we love controversy. Even if I can't think of anything to say, I can
still have _something_ to say, by being parasitic of somebody else's
said things.

But... let me, for a while, just put away the idea that writing is
meant to be read. For now, I just want to get into the habit that I
write, everyday. It's March 26th. It's not a special day, but a habit
should start any day: the best day is always today.

I wonder for how many days I'll be writing about not being unable to
write. Now, while I don't have anything interesting or inspiring to
say, Nietzsche does. So I'll quote Nietzsche, aphorism 304 from _The
Gay Science_,

> _By doing we forego._ -- At bottom I abhor all those moralities which say: "Do not do this! Renounce! Overcome yourself!" But I am well disposed toward those moralities which goad me to do something and do it again, from morning till evening, and then to dream of it at night, and to think of nothing except doing this _well_, as well as _I_ alone can do it. When one lives like that, one thing after another that simply does not belong to such a life drops off. Without hatred or aversion one sees this take its leave today and that tomorrow, like yellow leaves that any slight stirring of the air takes off a tree. He may not even notice that it takes its leave; for his eye is riveted to his goal -- forward, not sideward, backward, downward. What we do should determine what we forego; by doing we forego -- that is how I like it, that is my _principle_. But I do not wish to strive with open eyes for my own impoverishment; I do not like negative virtues -- virtues whose very essence it is to negate and deny oneself soething.
