---
layout: post
title: Why Not?
---

_They would never have met in life. But here they are, in death,
sharing a bench at a deserted station, waiting for the train to come
to take them away. A withered old man, and a young man in his 20s._

B: I bet you can't guess how old I am.

A: 85? How old are you?

B: I had my 97th birthday 2 weeks ago. My wife had long passed away. I
wonder if I'd see her again, hah. We never said goodbye. She died
suddenly, you know. I remember we used to go to the same diner every
Thursday for burgers. Burgers weren't evil, then. Nowadays burgers are
supposed to kill. Maybe that's what did her in. The diner went out of
business soon enough. Oh it's so long ago. I am so old. I am old. An
old curmudgeon. I wet my bed now, ha. Perhaps I lived too long, ha
ha. I am 97 years old. I smoked all my life. All those cigarettes
finally killed me, ha ha... How old are you?

A: 25.

B: When I was 25, I had my first son! A boy! My god, you can't
imagine. I don't imagine you are married?

A: No.

B: You can't imagine what it's like to have son. Gotta try it sometime
\[nudges the young man\]. Or maybe it's too late, ho ho. Well, maybe
there's a next life. Never too late, they say.

A: People say that. There's a next life. I don't believe it.

B: Maybe you ought to believe it. That's your only chance to have a
son.

A: Maybe I don't?

B: Maybe you don't. Maybe you don't. But I had a house, and I built it
myself. It was small at first. My family grew, and the house grew. My
grandson has the house now. He's an architect. Have I told you? And
he loves my house. He tells people his grandpaw built it.

A: What happened to your son?

B: Well, he's not getting the house. No way he's getting the house.

A: Why not?

B: He died, that's why, ha ha. He died young, actually. My wife, the
poor woman was hit the hardest.

A: Oh. Sorry.

B: You want to know how he died?

A: I wasn't going to ask.

B: But you want to know how he died? He killed himself. A bullet right
through his brain.

A: Oh. Sorry to hear that.

B: Can you imagine that? Putting a gun into your mouth and pulling the
trigger. The bastard. He just killed himself. Son of a bitch. Poor son
of a bitch.

A: Hmmm.

B: I never understood why. His wife left him. OK. But he's got a son
to raise. He just left the kid behind. When I see my son again, by
god, I am going to give him a good spank. My wife, she cried at
night. She'd lock herself in the bathroom. She'd never say anything
about it, and She'd never admit to it when I asked. I'd never forgive
my son for having done that to her.

A: He didn't do that to you.

B: How do you mean?

A: We don't mean to hurt people.

B: Hmmmph. Say, how did you die?

A: Well...

B: Bullshit.

A: Ya.

B: Why did you do it?

A: I don't know. I don't know why I killed myself. I don't know why I
was born. I certainly didn't mean to hurt anyone. It doesn't make any
difference whether I was there or not.

B: So here you are.

A: So here I am.

B: You are 25?

A: Ya. I was.

B: And you've had enough?

A: Uh...

B: How did you do it?

A: Gun.

B: \[Fascinated. Turns his body towards the young man.\] So you've had
enough? At 25? You've not married. You've not built your own house?
You've not watched your son growing up, and then his son. And you've
not had the chance to attend your own son's funeral, har har. You've
had enough??

A: I had nothing to look forward to. Why would I want to get married?
Because people do? Why do I want to build my own house? Who the fuck
build their own houses now? I've had enough. It was my way of
maximizing my happiness.

B: You don't have to build your own house, no. Hey, you don't have to
find a pretty girl to marry if you don't want to. But why wouldn't
you? My wife and I were high school sweethearts. I remember asking her
out for the prom. I was SURE she'd say no. I guess nobody else tried
their luck on her, ha ha. But hey, I am not saying you have to be like
me... you could... what's your name?

A: Will.

B: Willy. I am John. My wife calls me Johnny, but you can call me
Jack.

Will: Ok.

Jack: So Willy...

Will: Don't you think it's too late to talk about this?

Jack: No. Heck, it's never...

Will: Anyway, there's no next life. It's just a rumour. 

Jack: You think this is it?

Will: I dunno.

Jack: Don't you want another chance?

Will: I wouldn't know what to do with it. Maybe you should have
another go at it. You seem to have enjoyed it.

Jack: Ha! No. I've had enough. I've built my own house. And I loved my
wife. My son... bah. My grandson, oh he's wonderful. I've had
enough. This is enough.

Will: You've had no regrets?

Jack: Regrets! Hell ya. That nurse at the home is cute. I wish I could
have a go at her. She's old enough to be your mother though, ha
ha. Say, uh... uh... \[gesturing\] uh...

Will: Will.

Jack: Ya Will, what is it that makes you want to live? You know, you
wake up every morning, and you think to yourself, "another day, and by
God, I am gonna grab it by the balls." You know what I am saying?

Will: If I had known, I wouldn't be here, would I?

Jack: There weren't things you wanted to do?

Will: Sure. I'd like to see Rome.

Jack: So... why are you here? You should be in Rome!

Will: Bah! What difference does it make now? \[Looks away.\]

Jack: Look, son, you are still so young. You really shouldn't be here,
talking to an old geezer like me. You should see Rome. You should go
back.

Will: Go back? Don't be ridiculous! Who do you think I am... Houdini?
I blew my brain out. The mortician probably had to put the pieces of
my skull back together and clean me up good for the funeral. Which, of
course, was none of my business. I am already here, there's no going
back. I hope there's nothing going forward.

Jack: So you are one of them.

Will: Them what?

Jack: Them... ex... ex... ex commune.. ist.

Will: Existentialist?

Jack: Ya, ya. That.

Will: I am over-educated, alright.

Jack: Well do you have somebody you care about?

Will: Yes.

Jack: And you don't give a damn?

Will: \[Flares\] I do! \[Breaks\] And I am sorry... I am really sorry. But
I just can't. I just... I just can't. I told her it's not her
fault. There's nothing more she could do. She's done everything for
me. And I am really sorry.

Jack: Why?

Will: I don't know. \[pauses\] Anyway, here I am.

Jack: So here you are. You know, I've never forgiven my son. And I
don't think I ever will.

Will: I don't expect her to forgive me.

Jack: But I still love him.

Will: I am sure you do.


_Silence befalls them. They share the bench, as two strangers would,
as though the conversation never took place._

_A train comes into the station. The conductor approaches the two men
and examines their tickets. He returns the ticket to the young man,
and gestures him to keep waiting. Then the conductor takes the old
man's luggage, helps the old man to get up, then onto the train._

_The train leaves the station. The young man is left alone on the
deserted platform. He takes out a picture from his pocket. He says
something to the woman in the picture, then he kisses her. Then he
puts the picture back into his pocket. He waits._
