---
layout: post
title: Random Slices of Today
---

I would rather go to sleep than write my blog. Right now I just need
to post something anything everyday. But when I start to take this
more seriously (any time now...), I'll need to find a better time to
do it.

I made roasted tomatoes again. But then I didn't have time to make
anything with the tomatoes. So I ended up eating can food. Lame.

Another thing I am starting to realize is that a great bulk of my
professional time as a programmer will be dealing with mistakes I've
made. I wish I can just walk away. Writing new code (even if to do the
same thing) is a lot more fun. Which makes me wonder if there's a way
to make "refactoring" more fun. My idea of refactoring is rewrite.

I drank tea this afternoon. It made me skittish the whole night.

While eating, I was flipping through Bertrand Russell's _History of
Western Philosophy_. In the book, he has all these wonderful turn of
phrases, sniping at philosophers. On Aristotle, he writes,
"Aristotle's metaphysics, roughly speaking, may be described as Plato
diluted by common sense. He is difficult because Plato and common
sense do not mix easily." And so on.

I also learned that alcohol provides about 5% of the calories in an
average American diet. It is supposed to be "much more among heavy
drinkers." I wish the book said how much more. Wine making is
complicated business. I was reading from Harold McGee's _On Food and
Cooking_. The man is clearly in love with wine. He writes,


>Humankind has always had a thirst for alcohol, and now satisfies it with mass-produced drinks that offer an inexpensive respite from the world and its cares. But some wines and beers and spirits are among the most finely crafted foods there are, the best that the world and care have to offer. Their flavor can be so rich, balanced, dynamic, and persistent that they touch the mind not with release from the world, but with a heightened attentiveness and connection to it.

And later, he concludes the subsection on wine thusly,

> __An Ever-Changing Microcosm__ A given wine contains several hundred different kinds of volatile molecules, and those molecules have many different kinds of odors. In fact they run the gamut of our olfactory world. Some of the same molecules are also found in temperate and tropical fruits, flowers, leaves, wood, spices, animal scents, cooked foods of all kinds, even fuel tanks and nail polish remover. That's why wine can be so evocative yet so hard to describe: at its best, it offers a kind of sensory microcosm. And that little world of molecules is a dynamic one. It evolves over months and years in the bottle, by the minute in the glass, and in the mouth with every passing second. The vocabulary of wine tasting thus amounts to a catalogue of things in the world that can be smelled, and whose smell can be recognized, however fleetingly, in an attentive sip.

Not that I drink wine. But it's amazing how another person can have
such depth of experience in a realm I am hardly aware of. It's like
imagining what the world is like to a dog, who has a sharp awareness
of the going-on's in the world, all in terms of smells.