---
layout: post
title: Retrospective, One Month
---

It's been a month of blogging. I'd say that
towards the end it had become a chore. I had to
get it done because I said I would. While it's
been an exercise in discipline, I didn't really
spend that much effort in building an attractive
blog.

I think the biggest failure is simply the lack of
systematic planning. Especially towards the end, I
never thought about my blog until at the end of
the day when I had to write something. More often
than not, I end up saying that I have nothing to
say. Which, by the way, I would spend as much time
saying as when I had something to say. I forced
myself to sit for at least an hour, even if that
means staring at the blank screen.

So, I think what worked was when I paid attention
throughout the day for blogging
materials. Thoughts. Conversations. Frustrations. Questionable
flashes of insights.

One habit I lost, for better or worse. I used to
feel that what I write has to be "definitive",
otherwise why bother writing at all? I learned to
let go.

Anyway. I've produced some dreadful writings. One
day I'll go back to clean it up. But nobody cares,
really. When DHH first started blogging, he was
pretty lame, too.
